---
title: 'Go To Statement Considered Harmful'
layout: 'bare'
---

<header style="text-align:center">
<h1>Go To Statement Considered Harmful</h1>
<p><i>By Edsger W. Dijkstra</i></p>
<p><i>From: Communications of the ACM 11, 3 (March 1968). 47-148.</i></p>
</header>

For a number of years I have been familiar with the observation that the quality
of programmers is a decreasing function of the density of **go to** statements
in the programs they produce. More recently I discovered why the use of the **go
to** statement has such disastrous effects, and I became convinced that the **go
to** statement should be abolished from all "higher level" programming languages
(i.e. everything except, perhaps, plain machine code). At that time I did not
attach too much importance to this discovery; I now submit my considerations for
publication because in very recent discussions in which the subject turned up, I
have been urged to do so

My first remark is that, although the programmer's activity ends when he has
constructed a correct program, the process taking place under control of his
program is the true subject matter of his activity, for it is this process that
has to accomplish the desired effect; it is this process that in its dynamic
behavior has to satisfy the desired specifications. Yet, once the program has
been made, the "making' of the corresponding process is delegated to the
machine.

My second remark is that our intellectual powers are rather geared to master
static relations and that our powers to visualize processes evolving in time are
relatively poorly developed. For that reason we should do (as wise programmers
aware of our limitations) our utmost to shorten the conceptual gap between the
static program and the dynamic process, to make the correspondence between the
program (spread out in text space) and the process (spread out in time) as
trivial as possible.

Let us now consider how we can characterize the progress of a process. (You may
think about this question in a very concrete manner: suppose that a process,
considered as a time succession of actions, is stopped after an arbitrary
action, what data do we have to fix in order that we can redo the process until
the very same point?) If the program text is a pure concatenation of, say,
assignment statements (for the purpose of this discussion regarded as the
descriptions of single actions) it is sufficient to point in the program text to
a point between two successive action descriptions. (In the absence of **go to**
statements I can permit myself the syntactic ambiguity in the last three words
of the previous sentence: if we parse them as "successive (action descriptions)"
we mean successive in text space; if we parse as "(successive action)
descriptions" we mean successive in time.) Let us call such a pointer to a
suitable place in the text a "textual index."

When we include conditional clauses (**if** *B* **then** *A*), alternative
clauses (**if** *B* **then** *A1* **else** *A2*), choice clauses as introduced
by C. A. R. Hoare (case[i] of (*A1*, *A2*, ···, *An*)), or conditional
expressions as introduced by J. McCarthy (*B1* → *E1*, *B2* → *E2*, ···, *Bn* →
*En*), the fact remains that the progress of the process remains characterized
by a single textual index.

As soon as we include in our language procedures we must admit that a single
textual index is no longer sufficient. In the case that a textual index points
to the interior of a procedure body the dynamic progress is only characterized
when we also give to which call of the procedure we refer. With the inclusion of
procedures we can characterize the progress of the process via a sequence of
textual indices, the length of this sequence being equal to the dynamic depth of
procedure calling.

Let us now consider repetition clauses (like, **while** *B* **repeat** *A* or
**repeat** *A* **until** *B*). Logically speaking, such clauses are now
superfluous, because we can express repetition with the aid of recursive
procedures. For reasons of realism I don't wish to exclude them: on the one
hand, repetition clauses can be implemented quite comfortably with present day
finite equipment; on the other hand, the reasoning pattern known as "induction"
makes us well equipped to retain our intellectual grasp on the processes
generated by repetition clauses. With the inclusion of the repetition clauses
textual indices are no longer sufficient to describe the dynamic progress of the
process. With each entry into a repetition clause, however, we can associate a
so-called "dynamic index," inexorably counting the ordinal number of the
corresponding current repetition. As repetition clauses (just as procedure
calls) may be applied nestedly, we find that now the progress of the process can
always be uniquely characterized by a (mixed) sequence of textual and/or dynamic
indices.

The main point is that the values of these indices are outside programmer's
control; they are generated (either by the write-up of his program or by the
dynamic evolution of the process) whether he wishes or not. They provide
independent coordinates in which to describe the progress of the process.

Why do we need such independent coordinates? The reason is—and this seems to be
inherent to sequential processes—that we can interpret the value of a variable
only with respect to the progress of the process. If we wish to count the
number, say, of people in an initially empty room, we can achieve this by
increasing by one whenever we see someone entering the room. In the in-between
moment that we have observed someone entering the room but have not yet
performed the subsequent increase of, its value equals the number of people in
the room minus one!

The unbridled use of the **go to** statement has an immediate consequence that
it becomes terribly hard to find a meaningful set of coordinates in which to
describe the process progress. Usually, people take into account as well the
values of some well chosen variables, but this is out of the question because it
is relative to the progress that the meaning of these values is to be
understood! With the **go to** statement one can, of course, still describe the
progress uniquely by a counter counting the number of actions performed since
program start (viz. a kind of normalized clock). The difficulty is that such a
coordinate, although unique, is utterly unhelpful. In such a coordinate system
it becomes an extremely complicated affair to define all those points of
progress where, say, *n* equals the number of persons in the room minus one!

The **go to** statement as it stands is just too primitive; it is too much an
invitation to make a mess of one's program. One can regard and appreciate the
clauses considered as bridling its use. I do not claim that the clauses
mentioned are exhaustive in the sense that they will satisfy all needs, but
whatever clauses are suggested (e.g. abortion clauses) they should satisfy the
requirement that a programmer independent coordinate system can be maintained to
describe the process in a helpful and manageable way.

It is hard to end this with a fair acknowledgment. Am I to judge by whom my
thinking has been influenced? It is fairly obvious that I am not uninfluenced by
Peter Landin and Christopher Strachey. Finally I should like to record (as I
remember it quite distinctly) how Heinz Zemanek at the pre-ALGOL meeting in
early 1959 in Copenhagen quite explicitly expressed his doubts whether the **go
to** statement should be treated on equal syntactic footing with the assignment
statement. To a modest extent I blame myself for not having then drawn the
consequences of his remark

The remark about the undesirability of the **go to** statement is far from new.
I remember having read the explicit recommendation to restrict the use of the
**go to** statement to alarm exits, but I have not been able to trace it;
presumably, it has been made by C. A. R. Hoare. In [^1] Wirth and Hoare together
make a remark in the same direction in motivating the case construction: "Like
the conditional, it mirrors the dynamic structure of a program more clearly than
**go to** statements and switches, and it eliminates the need for introducing a
large number of labels in the program.

In [^2] Guiseppe Jacopini seems to have proved the (logical) superfluousness of
the **go to** statement. The exercise to translate an arbitrary flow diagram
more or less mechanically into a jump-less one, however, is not to be
recommended. Then the resulting flow diagram cannot be expected to be more
transparent than the original one

[^1]: Wirth, Niklaus, and Hoare C. A. R. A contribution to the development of
      ALGOL. *Comm. ACM 9* (June 1966), 413-432.

[^2]: BÖhm, Corrado, and Jacopini Guiseppe. Flow diagrams, Turing machines and
      languages with only two formation rules. *Comm. ACM 9* (May 1966), 366-371.
