---
layout: post
title: "It’s fine to be elitist, sometimes"
---

Last year I gave a simple and short presentation at a local Go meetup group
based on [Go testing style guide](/go-testing-style.html). One attendee who
didn't know *any* Go kept asking really basic questions about Go since I had
written the presentation assuming people actually knew the basics of Go.

I didn't show it, but I was rather annoyed at this. I came to the *Go* meetup to
talk to fellow experts, not to be recruited as an (unpaid) teacher.

This mirrors a general frustration I've had for a while: often experienced
programmers are expected, at any time, in any context, to patiently entertain
questions from new users and to help them out. Well, I don't want to.

Some might think I'm some grumpy old curmudgeon who hates new users. Hardly; I
started daemonforums.org, have more Stack Overflow points than most, have been a
mentor in the local code meetup, etc. I will gladly go out of my way to try and
explain things to new programmers. But not always, not at every place. I want to
do it on *my* terms, when *I* feel like it, and reject that I have an obligation
so do so all the time.

---

People have called this "elitist". Yes, it is, and I don't think there's
anything wrong with that. Experienced programmers are experts and there's
nothing wrong in wanting to talk only to fellow experts. Do graduated doctors
have to constantly entertain basic medical questions from first-year students at
every turn?

*Important note*: elitism is not the same as being condescending, treating
people as idiots, or otherwise acting like an asshole. It's simply about
accepting that sometimes experts want to talk to experts, and not beginners.

A lot of discussion surrounding programming happens on the internet, in spaces
where everyone is free to join. This is really great for many reasons, but it
does almost always have the side-effect that every space becomes a "help new
users out" space, whether it's desired or not, especially those focused on a
specific topic.

Even projects and communities which are very explicitly aimed towards expert
users – such as [suckless](https://suckless.org/philosophy/) – will get a fair
share of very basic newbie questions. Suckless programs are configured by
changing the C code; if you don't know the basics of C then you're simply not
the intended audience. It's like complaining you can't understand a book written
in Amharic.

And look, I'm all for people teaching themselves programming outside of a formal
education – I did that myself – and I'm all for spaces that help those people
out. Just ... not everywhere, not all the time.

---

**Postscript**: I have a somewhat similar frustration since moving to Ireland a
few months ago. A lot of the meetup/events here are attended by quite a lot of
people who spend several months in Ireland to learn English. That's all great,
but ... I don't go to these events to teach people English, I'm there to
socialize and meet people. The amount of women on Tinder with “just looking to
practice my English” is also staggering.
It's fine to have the occasional conversation with someone whose English is
poor, but all the time? It gets boring fast. One of the reasons I'll probably
move somewhere else.
