---
layout: post
title: "Why “rape games” are worse than violent games"
---

The game *Rape Day* – which is pitched as "a game where you can rape and murder
during a zombie apocalypse" – got [banned from the Steam platform][ars].

The interesting question here is, why is a game where you can kill innocent
people fine, but a game where you can rape people isn't? After all, I think we
can all agree that killing people is worse than raping them.

Yet for most people – including me – it *feels* different, somehow. I don't
think the severity of the actions are important, but rather their *distance*.
Murder is pretty rare, so "playing a murderer" isn't really connected to
real-life experiences. I can't really imagine getting murdered, or having a
loved one be murdered.

But sexual assault – including rape – is much more common. It's something that
we can imagining happening to yourself, your friends, your children. There's a
good chance it *has* happened to people you love. That makes people "playing
rapist" scary.


Not all cases of "playing murderer" are the same either. Games like
*Carmageddon* – where the player drives around killing hundreds of innocents –
are generally uncontroversial; there is an occasional outrage but it's usually
limited. But a game where you play a school shooter is different, even though
fewer people die. [Steam banned that one,
too](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/08/technology/steam-games-active-shooter.html)

Even though the amount of harm in the *School Shooter* game is less (fewer
people die), the *distance* to our everyday lives is far greater than the
scenario in *Carmageddon*.

The severity of harm is certainly *a* factor, but just one out of several. This
is also not limited to computer games; "rape jokes" are considerably more
sensitive than many other jokes. If I quip "mate, do that again and I'll kill
ya" then it's clearly a joke in many contexts, but "mate, do that again and I'll
rape ya" would be somewhere between weird and "run as fast as your can"-creepy.


[ars]: https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2019/03/with-rape-day-ban-steam-shows-its-not-as-hands-off-as-it-claims/
