---
title: "Downsides of working remotely"
tags: []
---

I love remote work, and I've been working remotely for the last five years, but
I think there are some serious downsides too. In spite what all the "remote work
is the future!" articles of the last year claim, it's not all perfect, or
suitable for everyone.

---

Working remotely means less socializing with your coworkers: fewer chats over
the coffee machine, you don't go out to the pub for a pint, that sort of thing.
I think you shouldn't underestimate the value of these kind of things: it's just
a lot easier to work with people you get along with well socially.

Conflicts will inevitably happen; it's just part of human nature. But the better
we get along socially the higher the chance is that we can resolve things
amicably without thinking (though not saying) "they're just a bloody idiot!", or
being left with a feeling of lingering resentment. The more you've socialized
with someone, the more "social goodwill" you've got to fall back on in times of
conflict.

It's hard to communicate over text *well*. Even if we ignore international
cultural differences, the lack of body language and direct feedback makes it
easy for misunderstandings and miscommunication to happen. We all phrase things
awkwardly or too harshly on occasion, and we can all lose our temper a bit (some
more frequently than others). This is normal, but when you write it in text
*it's there*; there is no opportunity to immediately correct it based on your
conversation partner's feedback; there is no body language to clarify the
meaning, there is no opportunity to immediately add nuance. The recipient will
just be left steaming over your shitty remark. It's *much* easier for things to
escalate.

Video conferencing is a bit better, but in my opinion still a poor substitute
over an actual conversation, and being in video chats all day also isn't really
an option. In practice, a lot of communication will happen over text (chats,
emails, issues, etc.).

---

Especially for more junior people the lack of feedback and guidance can be a
very detrimental. You can't just pop in and ask how they are doing, or sit next
to them and guide them through some things. When I guided an intern years ago I
would regularly just turn around (he was sitting behind me) and look on his
screen to see what he was doing and how he was doing it, and try to offer some
helpful guidance if needed. I felt it was very helpful for him (at least, I hope
so, although last I heard he didn't pursue his career in IT and is the manager
of a McDonald's now). This sort of thing is much harder to do well remotely.

The lack of guidance for more junior programmers is already a big problem in the
IT industry specifically because for decades there have been many more junior
people than senior people, and remote work makes this worse. Generally I
wouldn't recommend remote work for entry-level and junior jobs.

---

Another big downside is that remote work can get lonely; most of is don't hang
out with friends every single day, and it's not uncommon to not have a serious
conversation with anyone for days on end, especially if you live alone.
Depending on where you live and your personality, you can restructure your
social life a bit to compensate for this, which is what I ended up doing, but
it's something that takes some amount of effort and isn't necessarily for
everyone.

For this reason alone, I feel that remote work on a grand scale might not really
be a good thing. Western society in general seems to have a bit of an issue with
social contact – how many of us talk to our neighbours?

This isn't something that can be ascribed to a single cause, or something I have
an answer to – but we already tore down the church and village communities for
many, and I'm not sure if it's a good idea to tear down the "office community"
too. Not that I think these communities were necessarily the best (I'm not
religious), but tearing it all down without ... something ... as a replacement
may not be wise.

---

Don't get me wrong, I love working remote: I have fewer headaches (why are so
many offices so badly ventilated?!), don't have to mentally block out noise all
day long (which I find very draining), and can make my own schedule. In general,
I'm much more productive and happier.

But in the torrent of enthusiasm of remote work in the COVID era, it's probably
good to focus on some downsides, too. Personally, I'm skeptical that it's "the
future of work" and will introduce a paradigm shift. And if it does, we should
be acutely aware of some of the downsides.

Other people have listed some other downsides, such as a lack of structure or
work/life balance. These have not been any problems for me personally (I very
much *like* the lack of structure, and feel the "eight hours bum-on-seat" model
is equally problematic). Some other perspectives:

- [Eight Months of Remote Work](https://georgestocker.com/2015/11/17/eight-months-of-remote-work/)
- (Probably more, I'll add some when I find them; feel free to email them)
